The Right to Read
by Richard Stallman

This article appeared in the February 1997 issue of Communications of
the ACM (Volume 40, Number 2).

(from "The Road To Tycho", a collection of articles about the
antecedents of the Lunarian Revolution, published in Luna City in
2096)

For Dan Halbert, the road to Tycho began in college - when Lissa Lenz
asked to borrow his computer. Hers had broken down, and unless she
could borrow another, she would fail her midterm project. There was no
one she dared ask, except Dan.

This put Dan in a dilemma. He had to help her - but if he lent her his
computer, she might read his books. Aside from the fact that you could
go to prison for many years for letting someone else read your books,
the very idea shocked him at first. Like everyone, he had been taught
since elementary school that sharing books was nasty and
wrong - something that only pirates would do.

And there wasn't much chance that the SPA - the Software Protection
Authority - would fail to catch him. In his software class, Dan had
learned that each book had a copyright monitor that reported when and
where it was read, and by whom, to Central Licensing. (They used this
information to catch reading pirates, but also to sell personal
interest profiles to retailers.) The next time his computer was
networked, Central Licensing would find out. He, as computer owner,
would receive the harshest punishment - for not taking pains to
prevent the crime.

Of course, Lissa did not necessarily intend to read his books. She
might want the computer only to write her midterm. But Dan knew she
came from a middle-class family and could hardly afford the tuition,
let alone her reading fees. Reading his books might be the only way
she could graduate. He understood this situation; he himself had had
to borrow to pay for all the research papers he read. (10% of those
fees went to the researchers who wrote the papers; since Dan aimed for
an academic career, he could hope that his own research papers, if
frequently referenced, would bring in enough to repay this loan.)

Later on, Dan would learn there was a time when anyone could go to the
library and read journal articles, and even books, without having to
pay. There were independent scholars who read thousands of pages
without government library grants. But in the 1990s, both commercial
and nonprofit journal publishers had begun charging fees for
access. By 2047, libraries offering free public access to scholarly
literature were a dim memory.

There were ways, of course, to get around the SPA and Central
Licensing. They were themselves illegal. Dan had had a classmate in
software, Frank Martucci, who had obtained an illicit debugging tool,
and used it to skip over the copyright monitor code when reading
books. But he had told too many friends about it, and one of them
turned him in to the SPA for a reward (students deep in debt were
easily tempted into betrayal). In 2047, Frank was in prison, not for
pirate reading, but for possessing a debugger.

Dan would later learn that there was a time when anyone could have
debugging tools. There were even free debugging tools available on CD
or downloadable over the net. But ordinary users started using them to
bypass copyright monitors, and eventually a judge ruled that this had
become their principal use in actual practice. This meant they were
illegal; the debuggers' developers were sent to prison.

Programmers still needed debugging tools, of course, but debugger
vendors in 2047 distributed numbered copies only, and only to
officially licensed and bonded programmers. The debugger Dan used in
software class was kept behind a special firewall so that it could be
used only for class exercises.

It was also possible to bypass the copyright monitors by installing a
modified system kernel. Dan would eventually find out about the free
kernels, even entire free operating systems, that had existed around
the turn of the century. But not only were they illegal, like
debuggers - you could not install one if you had one, without knowing
your computer's root password. And neither the FBI nor Microsoft
Support would tell you that.

Dan concluded that he couldn't simply lend Lissa his computer. But he
couldn't refuse to help her, because he loved her. Every chance to
speak with her filled him with delight. And that she chose him to ask
for help, that could mean she loved him too.

Dan resolved the dilemma by doing something even more unthinkable - he
lent her the computer, and told her his password. This way, if Lissa
read his books, Central Licensing would think he was reading them. It
was still a crime, but the SPA would not automatically find out about
it. They would only find out if Lissa reported him.

Of course, if the school ever found out that he had given Lissa his
own password, it would be curtains for both of them as students,
regardless of what she had used it for. School policy was that any
interference with their means of monitoring students' computer use was
grounds for disciplinary action. It didn't matter whether you did
anything harmful - the offense was making it hard for the
administrators to check on you. They assumed this meant you were doing
something else forbidden, and they did not need to know what it was.

Students were not usually expelled for this - not directly. Instead
they were banned from the school computer systems, and would
inevitably fail all their classes.

Later, Dan would learn that this kind of university policy started
only in the 1980s, when university students in large numbers began
using computers. Previously, universities maintained a different
approach to student discipline; they punished activities that were
harmful, not those that merely raised suspicion.

Lissa did not report Dan to the SPA. His decision to help her led to
their marriage, and also led them to question what they had been
taught about piracy as children. The couple began reading about the
history of copyright, about the Soviet Union and its restrictions on
copying, and even the original United States Constitution. They moved
to Luna, where they found others who had likewise gravitated away from
the long arm of the SPA. When the Tycho Uprising began in 2062, the
universal right to read soon became one of its central aims.

---

Author's Note

This note was updated in 2007.

The right to read is a battle being fought today. Although it may take
50 years for our present way of life to fade into obscurity, most of
the specific laws and practices described above have already been
proposed; many have been enacted into law in the US and elsewhere. In
the US, the 1998 Digital Millenium Copyright Act established the legal
basis to restrict the reading and lending of computerized books (and
other works as well). The European Union imposed similar restrictions
in a 2001 copyright directive. In France, under the DADVSI law adopted
in 2006, mere possession of a copy of DeCSS, the free program to
decrypt video on a DVD, is a crime.

In 2001, Disney-funded Senator Hollings proposed a bill called the
SSSCA that would require every new computer to have mandatory
copy-restriction facilities that the user cannot bypass. Following the
Clipper chip and similar US government key-escrow proposals, this
shows a long-term trend: computer systems are increasingly set up to
give absentees with clout control over the people actually using the
computer system. The SSSCA was later renamed to the unpronouncable
CBDTPA, which was glossed as the "Consume But Don't Try
Programming Act".

The Republicans took control of the US senate shortly thereafter. They
are less tied to Hollywood than the Democrats, so they did not press
these proposals. Now that the Democrats are back in control, the
danger is once again higher.

In 2001 the US began attempting to use the proposed Free Trade Area of
the Americas treaty to impose the same rules on all the countries in
the Western Hemisphere. The FTAA is one of the so-called "free trade"
treaties, which are actually designed to give business increased power
over democratic governments; imposing laws like the DMCA is typical of
this spirit. The FTAA was effectively killed by Lula, President of
Brazil, who rejected the DMCA requirement and others.

Since then, the US has imposed similar requirements on countries such
as Australia and Mexico through bilateral "free trade" agreements, and
on countries such as Costa Rica through CAFTA. Ecuador's President
Correa refused to sign the "free trade" agreement, but Ecuador had
adopted something like the DMCA in 2003. Ecuador's new constitution
may provide an opportunity to get rid of it.

One of the ideas in the story was not proposed in reality until
2002. This is the idea that the FBI and Microsoft will keep the root
passwords for your personal computers, and not let you have them.

The proponents of this scheme have given it names such as "trusted
computing" and "palladium". We call it "treacherous computing",
because the effect is to make your computer obey companies instead of
you. This was implemented in 2007 as part of Windows Vista; we expect
Apple to do something similar. In this scheme, it is the manufacturer
that keeps the secret code, but the FBI would have little trouble
getting it.

What Microsoft keeps is not exactly a password in the traditional
sense; no person ever types it on a terminal. Rather, it is a
signature and encryption key that corresponds to a second key stored
in your computer in a place that you can't read. This enables
Microsoft and your computer to exchange secret messages - secret from
you, that is. Vista does not allow you to install any code in the
system that was not approved by Microsoft. The purpose of this, and
many other restrictions, is to make DRM that can't be overcome by
programming your computer.

The SPA, which actually stands for Software Publisher's Association,
has been replaced in this police-like role by the BSA or Business
Software Alliance. It is not, today, an official police force;
unofficially, it acts like one. Using methods reminiscent of the
erstwhile Soviet Union, it invites people to inform on their coworkers
and friends. A BSA terror campaign in Argentina in 2001 made
slightly-veiled threats that people sharing software would be raped.

When this story was written, the SPA was threatening small Internet
service providers, demanding they permit the SPA to monitor all
users. Most ISPs surrendered when threatened, because they cannot
afford to fight back in court. (Atlanta Journal-Constitution, 1 Oct
96, D3.) At least one ISP, Community ConneXion in Oakland CA, refused
the demand and was actually sued. The SPA later dropped the suit, but
obtained the DMCA which gave them the power they sought.

The university security policies described above are not
imaginary. For example, a computer at one Chicago-area university
prints this message when you log in (quotation marks are in the
original):

This system is for the use of authorized users only. Individuals using
this computer system without authority or in the excess of their
authority are subject to having all their activities on this system
monitored and recorded by system personnel. In the course of
monitoring individuals improperly using this system or in the course
of system maintenance, the activities of authorized user may also be
monitored. Anyone using this system expressly consents to such
monitoring and is advised that if such monitoring reveals possible
evidence of illegal activity or violation of University regulations
system personnel may provide the evidence of such monitoring to
University authorities and/or law enforcement officials.

This is an interesting approach to the Fourth Amendment: pressure most
everyone to agree, in advance, to waive their rights under it.
References

* The administration's "White Paper": Information Infrastructure Task
  Force, Intellectual Property and the National Information
  Infrastructure: The Report of the Working Group on Intellectual
  Property Rights (1995).

* An explanation of the White Paper: The Copyright Grab, Pamela
  Samuelson, Wired, Jan. 1996

* Sold Out, James Boyle, New York Times, 31 March 1996

* Public Data or Private Data, Washington Post, 4 Nov 1996. We used to
  have a link to this, but Washinton Post has decided to start
  charging users who wishes to read articles on the web site and
  therefore we have decided to remove the link.  * Union for the
  Public Domain - an organization which aims to resist and reverse the
  overextension of copyright and patent powers.

This essay is published in Free Software, Free Society: The Selected
Essays of Richard M. Stallman.

Copyright (c) 1996 Richard Stallman

Verbatim copying and distribution of this entire article is permitted
in any medium without royalty provided this notice is preserved.
